[Music]
now here's an unusual coronavirus
pandemic lockdown statistic more
billionaires have been created those on
the sunday times rich list saw their
fortunes grow by around a fifth
during the crisis and this acceleration
is the greatest we've seen over the last
33 years
uh gary stevenson is an economist and a
former city trader
also you know a bit about money gary
welcome to the program
why are people getting so filthy rich
yeah well it's a phenomenal statistic
isn't it as you say there's been about
an increase of a fit per person which is
a total increase of about
600 billion pounds now this was actually
predictable at the beginning of the
pandemic and if you look at my articles
online i actually said this would happen
about a year ago
the reason is because in the past when
there were big crises like the wars
the government might try and tax the
rich to deal with those problems
but in this crisis the government has
done something totally different which
is simply
print enormous amounts of money the
government printed that money
and that money has largely ended up with
richer people those people have saved
that money that's pushed up stock prices
that's pushed up house prices
who own stocks who owns assets well it's
the rich and the people who won the most
are the same price so what that has
meant is
whilst millions of people have lost
their jobs and their incomes we've seen
an explosion in the wealth of the
richest people in the country
you make it sound so simple gary but i
get it in terms of government money has
basically
flowed through the proletariat and ended
up in the rich
yeah i mean what it basically is is the
the big economic problem of kobe
is that people stop spending money
ordinary people and poor people
most of their spending is on essentials
they haven't stopped spending money the
people who have stopped spending money
are richer people who have higher
amounts of luxury spending
the people who have the most luxury
spending are obviously the richest but
that has meant that the people who have
accumulated money has largely been the
richer people in the country
and obviously as we can see richer
people when they make money they get
richer
they make a lot of money yeah i think
another statistic from the survey
um is that it's actually quite a small
club this isn't it the
the richer the pre-existing rich
actually have got richer it's not that
we're adding huge numbers of people but
that
171 billionaires is quite a stat isn't
it
it's a lot of billionaires there's a lot
of billionaires and i think what's
really important for people to
understand here is
we're talking about billionaires a
billion pounds 1 000 million pounds
right this is not doctors and lawyers
people who work hard and study hard to
make this money often these are people
who own huge businesses
often it's massive business heirs and
the thing which i want people to really
understand is this is not just abstract
numbers
when the rich get richer it affects
ordinary people they buy assets they
push up house prices
that makes housing less affordable for
ordinary people and i've put up a video
if you want to understand how this
affects ordinary people on my youtube
called what is wealth and you can see
that on my youtube channel economics
okay and is that do you think a problem
is that something that is
that clearly is to the disadvantage of
the vast majority of us whatever
uh financial strata we might be on yeah
you know look i've been following this
for years and years and years i used to
work in the city my job was to predict
will the economy be strong
according to me if we let the rich
accumulate huge amounts of money
the rich don't spend money on ordinary
things it doesn't drive wages they
invest money they buy assets stocks
shares houses
so the ultimate result is essentially
house prices go up and
that hurts ordering families especially
younger people so if we don't fix this
problem of huge amounts of money flowing
purely to the riches and not to the rest
we're not going to see an economic
recovery
that sounds like an argument for some
kind of super tax would you be for that
does that work
well i think it could work if it's
carefully designed obviously whenever we
talk about taxing the riches
the big problem is the rich have got the
best accountants and they will try and
dodge the taxes
yeah so any tax that we bring in has to
be really carefully designed so that it
hits the super rich and not just
ordinary working people
but personally i think if we don't do
that we're in for another 10 years of
economic stuff
and i'm not saying that i've been
betting on this because it's a 2008
crisis
and i've been right for 10 years i've
been making millions of pounds of doing
it if we don't find a way to tax the
riches
it's going to be disaster for the rest
of us gary good to talk to you thank you
very much indeed gary stevenson an
economist
and a former city trader
you